Liverpool Mohamed Salah boost even bigger than expected as World Cup offers major new advantage Liverpool were always set to do quite well from the World Cup, with relatively few players in attendance.
 But the Mohamed Salah boost is even bigger than that.The festive season is never exactly a serene period for Premier League players at the best of times. Packed Decembers are par for the course in England, where sports science gives way to tradition and a feast of football is squeezed into a month. Last season, Liverpool played eight games.

Incredibly, the Boxing Day matches will still go ahead this year, featuring the first league fixtures back after the break. But for many players, that ‘break’ will include a World Cup, which will involve packing in games even more tightly than usual.

Liverpool’s last December saw them average a game every 3.9 days. It will be Mohamed Salah even more intense in Qatar — were Brazil to win, for example, they would have had to play once every 3.6 days, starting from their opener against Serbia in 10 days’ time.Coming back from that and being thrust straight back into league action — where the fixtures will come thick and fast, to make up for the World Cup pause — is a mammoth demand to place on the players. And some will have it even worse than others.

Of the 20 players to have accumulated the most minutes in the Premier League this season, 16 will be going to the World Cup (The Athletic). Liverpool will feel this first-hand: Virgil van-Dijk is the only outfielder to have played every minute in the Premier League this season, and he will now jet off to be a captain and ever-present for the Netherlands. He will be needed back in Jurgen Klopp’s team as soon as possible on his return.

Just four of the 20 most-used players are set for a well-eed break. One of those staying behind is David de-Gea,Mohamed Salah who is unlikely to feel any particular advantage from a rest. But from the remaining three, Liverpool are set to derive a genuine benefit.
mo salah mo salah mo salah!