H&M: Justin Bieber collection axed after singer's 'trash' criticism
Justin Bieber
IMAGE SOURCE,GETTY IMAGES
Image caption,
Justin Bieber said he didn't endorse the collection featuring images of him
H&M has removed a Justin Bieber-inspired collection after it was branded "trash" by the singer.

The 28-year-old said he had not approved the collection, which included T-shirts, jumpers, tote bags and phone accessories.

Posting on his Instagram Story, the Sorry singer urged people not to buy the items which he said were being sold without his permission or approval.

The company said proper procedures were followed but have now pulled the line.

"The H&M Merch they made out of me is trash and I didn't approve it," Justin wrote on his Instagram story on Tuesday. "Don't buy it.

"I didn't approve any of the merch collection that they put up at H&M," he continued.

"All without my permission and approval. I wouldn't buy it if I were you."

Second Instagram screenshot from Bieber's account reading: The H&M merch they made of me is trash and I didn't approve it don't buy it
IMAGE SOURCE,INSTAGRAM/JUSTINBIEBER
Image caption,
Justin slammed the collection on his Instagram story on Tuesday
In a statement, H&M defended the fashion line, which reportedly features images of the star.

"As with all other licensed products and partnerships, H&M followed proper approval procedures," a spokesperson for the fashion retailer said.

"But out of respect for the collaboration and Justin Bieber we have removed the garments from our stores and online."

Justin Bieber suspends tour due to health issues
Bieber: Jesus gives me peace in paralysis struggle
It's not the first time a star has hit out at a brand for using their image without permission.

In 2015, Rihanna won a court case against Topshop - she successfully sued its parent company for £3.3m after it sold a sleeveless T-shirt with her photo on it.

And in 2019, Ariana Grande brought action against Forever 21 after she claimed it published at least 30 "unauthorised" images and videos that suggested she had endorsed the brand.

Shopper with H&M bag
IMAGE SOURCE,GETTY IMAGES
Image caption,
H&M said protocols had been followed but removed the collection "out of respect"
Justin is currently on a break from touring after he revealed he was suffering from facial paralysis, after a diagnosis of Ramsay Hunt syndrome.

Ramsay Hunt syndrome is when a shingles outbreak affects the facial nerve near someone's ears, resulting in paralysis of parts of the face.

line
Newsbeat logo
Follow Newsbeat on Twitter and YouTube.

Listen to Newsbeat live at 12:45 and 17:45 weekdays - or listen back here.

More on this story
Justin Bieber suspends tour due to health issues
7 September
Justin Bieber performing on 12 August
Bieber: Jesus gives me peace in paralysis struggle
14 June
Justin Bieber
Justin Bieber drops defamation lawsuit over assault claims
23 March
Justin Bieber
Justin Bieber says his drug use got 'crazy scary'
4 February 2020
Justin Bieber
Singer Justin Bieber reveals he has Lyme disease
9 January 2020
Justin Bieber
Ariana Grande claims Forever 21 'stole' name
3 September 2019
Ariana Grande
Pop star Rihanna wins image battle
22 January 2015
Rihanna/Topshop
Related Topics
H&M
Justin Bieber
Music
