Laser scans created a 3D map of each tree
An accurate calculation of the amount of carbon trapped in UK woodland could help inform decisions about how to manage it - in addition to highlighting the cost to the environment of losing that woodland.

Before 3D scanning techniques were available, weighing a tree would mean cutting it down.

The latest research, published in the journal Ecological Solutions and Evidence, produced laser-scanned maps of each tree and converted those into a model.

That gave a measure of each tree's volume which the scientists used to calculate the amount of carbon captured in each tree's trunk and branches. It showed that a patch of UK forest weighs about twice as much as previous calculations suggested.

"When you know the density of the wood, you can convert volume into mass," explains Prof Mat Disney, from UCL. "About half of that mass will be carbon, half is water."

Wytham Wood, one of the most scientifically studied forests in the world, is typical of UK deciduous woodland, meaning the area weighed by scientists affords an accurate estimate of the carbon value of forests across the UK.


Media caption,
Why scientists are weighing the rainforests with lasers

"There has probably been an underestimation of carbon in UK woodland, but probably across Europe as well," said Prof Calders.

'Incalculable' value
As well as being important ecosystems, healthy forests remove planet-warming carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.

Prof Disney says the new findings show that, for every square kilometre of woodland lost, "we potentially lose almost twice the carbon sink capacity we thought".

As Prof Robert MacKenzie from the Birmingham Institute of Forest Research pointed out, aboveground forests are "an important, [but] temporary store of carbon that can help us get past the current climate emergency".

"Ultimately," he told BBC News, "we need to stop emitting fossil carbon and lock carbon away for centuries to millennia. Some of that can happen in forests and other soils, and the rest will have to come from carbon capture and storage."

Humans turning forests into carbon emitters
Bird eggs suggest spring is three weeks earlier
For the near future though, Prof Disney says this research has serious implications for our understanding of the benefits of protecting trees, in terms of climate change. And the complex structure of mature trees in particular means they play a role that is very difficult to replace by simply planting more trees.

"The value you have in large mature trees is almost incalculable, and so you should avoid losing that at any cost - regardless of how many trees you think about planting," said Prof Disney.

"Those large trees are incredibly important."

Follow Victoria on Twitter

More on this story
Humans turning forests into carbon emitters
28 October 2021
Massane forest after wildfire
Bird eggs suggest spring is three weeks earlier
5 May
Great tit at Wytham Woods
Related Topics
Trees
Oxfordshire County Council
Top Stories
LIVE. Zelensky tells Congress Ukraine will never surrender
Putin says Russia not to blame for Ukraine war
Published
7 hours ago
China's hospitals seem to be filling up - WHO
Published
3 hours ago
Features
Zelensky follows in Churchill's footsteps with wartime address
Winston Churchill addresses the US Congress on 26 December 1941.
What Zelensky and Biden want from this Washington visit
Zelensky and Biden at the White House
The man who survived the 'Nazi typist's' concentration camp
The Death Gate on the entrance to the area of the former Nazi German concentration camp KL Stutthof is seen in Sztutowo, Poland on 10 September 2022
African, Arab or Amazigh? Morocco's identity crisis
A fan from Morocco in Qatar - December 2022
What to expect from next World Cup in 2026
A general view of the Azteca Stadium
The trip that transformed Australia and China ties
Stephen Fitzgerald meeting Zhou Enlai in 1973
The two sides of Scotland's gender law debate
Supporter and opponent of the bill outside the Scottish Parliament
Ghost Town: 'The song Thatcher wishes was never released'
The Specials
Ros Atkins on... China’s Covid surge. VideoRos Atkins on... China’s Covid surge
Two people wearing PPE
Elsewhere on the BBC
The dark side of a children's classic
wooden figure
Asia's most beautiful train route?
train on elevated bridge
The diseases soaring post-lockdown
child in hospital
Most Read
1
Putin says Russia not to blame for Ukraine war
2
Trump business losses sharply reduced his tax bill
3
Nepal jail to free serial killer The Serpent
4
Eight Canadian teen girls charged with killing man
5
China's hospitals seem to be filling up - WHO
6
Body found in undercarriage of Gatwick plane
7
Zelensky follows in Churchill's footsteps with wartime address
8
Powerful winter storm disrupts holiday travel
9
Israel's most right-wing government agreed
10
Mead wins Sports Personality of the Year
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On smart speakers
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Home
News
Sport
Reel
Worklife
Travel
Future
Culture
Music
TV
Weather
Sounds
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Get Personalised Newsletters
Why you can trust the BBC
Advertise with us
AdChoices / Do Not Sell My Info
© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.