
BBC News Climate & Science
Next year will be warmer than this one, and one of the hottest on record, the UK Met Office is forecasting.

Predictions suggest it will be the 10th year in a row the global temperature is at least 1C above average.

The Met Office explained that a cooling effect known as La Niña will likely end after being in place for three years - part of a natural weather cycle.

It also noted the warming impact of human-induced climate change.

Scientific evidence shows that climate change is driving up the global temperature.

Governments globally have promised to cut emissions to keep temperature rise below 1.5C to avoid the worst effects of climate change.

The world has already warmed by around 1.1C compared to the period before the Industrial Revolution in 1750-1900 when humans began burning large amounts of fossil fuels, releasing warming gases into the atmosphere.

Media caption,
Climate Check

Temperatures in 2023 are forecast to be between 1.08C and 1.32C above the pre-industrial average.

The warmest year since records began in 1850 was in 2016, when meteorologists said the weather phenomenon known as El Niño boosted global temperatures.

But the past three years have been affected by another weather pattern called La Niña when cooler-than-average sea temperatures in the Pacific lowered the average global temperature.

Summer 2022 smashed dozens of UK records
A really simple guide to climate change
What climate change will look like in your area
That effect is now predicted to end, bringing warmer conditions in parts of the Pacific and leading to the global temperature being warmer than in 2022.

Unlike 2016, it is not expected to be a record-breaking year because El Niño will not be boosting global temperature, explains Prof Adam Scaife, head of long-range prediction at the Met Office.

But some parts of the world such as the Arctic are warming at a faster rate than average.

"Next year the natural and temporary braking effect of La Niña will wane. The full-on gas pedal will invigorate warming over the coming year and continue into the future, along with more severe wet, dry and hot extremes, until policies are in place to achieve net zero greenhouse gas emissions," Richard Allan, professor of climate science at University of Reading told BBC News.

In 2022 temperature records were broken in numerous parts of the world, including in the UK which recorded above 40C.

Devastating wildfires hit parts of Europe and Australia linked to hot weather, and Pakistan and India sweltered with temperatures reaching 51C in May.

In a series of studies scientists concluded that these temperatures were made much more likely by climate change.

Rising temperatures are predicted to lead to devastating effects on humans and nature, including more drought, desertification and heat-related illness.


View comments
Related Topics
Weather forecasting
Climate change
Top Stories
LIVE. Zelensky tells Congress Ukraine will never surrender
Putin says Russia not to blame for Ukraine war
Published
7 hours ago
China's hospitals seem to be filling up - WHO
Published
3 hours ago
Features
Zelensky follows in Churchill's footsteps with wartime address
Winston Churchill addresses the US Congress on 26 December 1941.
What Zelensky and Biden want from this Washington visit
Zelensky and Biden at the White House
The man who survived the 'Nazi typist's' concentration camp
The Death Gate on the entrance to the area of the former Nazi German concentration camp KL Stutthof is seen in Sztutowo, Poland on 10 September 2022
African, Arab or Amazigh? Morocco's identity crisis
A fan from Morocco in Qatar - December 2022
What to expect from next World Cup in 2026
A general view of the Azteca Stadium
The trip that transformed Australia and China ties
Stephen Fitzgerald meeting Zhou Enlai in 1973
The two sides of Scotland's gender law debate
Supporter and opponent of the bill outside the Scottish Parliament
Ghost Town: 'The song Thatcher wishes was never released'
The Specials
Ros Atkins on... China’s Covid surge. VideoRos Atkins on... China’s Covid surge
Two people wearing PPE
Elsewhere on the BBC
The dark side of a children's classic
wooden figure
Asia's most beautiful train route?
train on elevated bridge
The diseases soaring post-lockdown
child in hospital
Most Read
1
Putin says Russia not to blame for Ukraine war
2
Trump business losses sharply reduced his tax bill
3
Nepal jail to free serial killer The Serpent
4
Eight Canadian teen girls charged with killing man
5
China's hospitals seem to be filling up - WHO
6
Body found in undercarriage of Gatwick plane
7
Zelensky follows in Churchill's footsteps with wartime address
8
Powerful winter storm disrupts holiday travel
9
Israel's most right-wing government agreed
10
Mead wins Sports Personality of the Year
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On smart speakers
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Home
News
Sport
Reel
Worklife
Travel
Future
Culture
Music
TV
Weather
Sounds
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Get Personalised Newsletters
Why you can trust the BBC
Advertise with us
AdChoices / Do Not Sell My Info
© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.