Third Cinema
cinema movement
    
Alternate titles: Third World Cinema
By John LeBlanc Article History
Related Artists: Ousmane Sembène
Third Cinema, also called Third World Cinema, aesthetic and political cinematic movement in Third World countries (mainly in Latin America and Africa) meant as an alternative to Hollywood (First Cinema) and aesthetically oriented European films (Second Cinema). Third Cinema films aspire to be socially realistic portrayals of life and emphasize topics and issues such as poverty, national and personal identity, tyranny and revolution, colonialism, class, and cultural practices). The term was coined by Argentine filmmakers Fernando Solanas and Octavio Getino, the producers of La hora de los hornos (1968; The Hour of the Furnaces), one of the best-known Third Cinema documentary films of the 1960s, in their manifesto “Hacia un tercer cine” (1969; “Toward a Third Cinema”).

Third Cinema was rooted in Marxist aesthetics generally and was influenced by the socialist sensibility of German dramatist Bertolt Brecht, the British social documentary developed by producer John Grierson, and post-World War II Italian Neorealism. Third Cinema filmmakers went beyond those predecessors to call for an end to the division between art and life and to insist on a critical and intuitive, rather than a propagandist, cinema in order to produce a new emancipatory mass culture.

Ethiopian-born American cinema scholar Teshome Gabriel identified a three-phase path along which films have emerged from Third World countries. In the first phase, assimilationist films, such as those of Bollywood in India, follow those of Hollywood in focusing on entertainment and technical virtuosity and de-emphasize local subject matter. In the second phase, films feature local control of production and are about local culture and history, but they tend to romanticize the past while neglecting social transformation. Senegalese director Ousmane Sembène’s Mandabi (1968; “The Money Order”), about a traditional man confronting modern ways, and Burkinabé director Gaston Kaboré’s Wend Kuuni (1983; “God’s Gift”), about a mute boy who regains his speech after viewing a tragedy, characterize the second phase. In the third phase, combative films, such as Chilean film director Miguel Littin’s La tierra prometida (1973; The Promised Land), place production in the hands of the people (instead of local elites) and use film as an ideological tool.

Despite their geographical and historical specificity, Third Cinema films do not conform to any one aesthetic strategy but instead employ whatever formal techniques—mainstream or avant-garde—that suit the subject at hand. Often, directors and actors are not full-time professionals. Craftsmanship is discouraged, and more emphasis is placed on the viewers’ role in creating the film, inviting them to explore the spaces between representation and reality and become producers rather than consumers of culture.

Third Cinema began in Latin America in 1967 with the strong anticolonial emphasis at the Festival of Latin American Cinema in Viña del Mar, Chile, and the release of The Hour of the Furnaces, a radical and controversial rendering of Argentine history and politics in the 1960s, with its accompanying manifesto, “Towards a Third Cinema.” That anticolonial approach then became less doctrinaire in feature films such as Chilean Raúl Ruiz’s Tres tristes tigres (1968; Three Sad Tigers), which provided a variety of options for social change in its examination of the Santiago underworld through a single handheld camera, emphasizing the city’s atmosphere of entrapment. The Third Cinema approach spread worldwide through international exposure, especially in Europe, overcoming the obstacles of dictators and state sponsorship in the 1970s .

In Africa the Third Cinema was illustrated notably in the films of Sembène, such as Xala (1975) and Moolaadé (2004), with their mixture of African and Western elements and their critical approach to local culture. Another example of Third Cinema was Algerian filmmaker Abderrahmane Bouguermouh’s La Colline oubliée (1997; The Forgotten Hillside), which was shot in the Berber language and treated the traditional ways of its mountain-dwelling characters with ambivalence.

Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content.
Subscribe Now
Third Cinema films do not have to be located in the Third World. In the British films of the Black Audio Film Collective (and related groups such as Sankofa), such as John Akomfrah’s Handsworth Songs (1986), both the style and the substance of the traditional British documentary approach to race relations were 