
Transfer Centre: Lionel Messi and PSG positive on new deal
Transfer Centre LIVE! 
Messi & PSG 'feeling positive' ahead of contract talks in new year  View post
Arsenal, Tottenham and Atletico Madrid chasing Mac Allister  View post
Chelsea appoint ex-Leipzig recruitment chief Vivell as technical director | Vivell's key signings and sales  View post
Man Utd trigger Rashford, Shaw, Dalot, Fred deals  View post
Wolves agree deal for Cunha | Loan then £34m fee  View post
Transfer rumours: Arsenal | Chelsea | Liverpool | Man City | Man Utd | Newcastle | Tottenham
Sort by:
LatestSort by latest OldestSort by oldest
5h ago
20:54
PSG will hold new contract talks with Messi early in New Year
Paris Saint-Germain will have talks with Lionel Messi early in the New Year about extending his contract.

Both sides are feeling positive the World Cup winner will sign a new deal with the French champions.

The 35-year-old's current contract expires next summer.

Messi is currently in Argentina celebrating their World Cup win, with PSG giving him the time off he needs.


The Ligue 1 leaders' next game is at home to Strasbourg on December 28.

Meanwhile, French daily Le Parisien are reporting Messi has already reached a deal with the the club to stay for the 2023-24 season.

The seven-times winner of the Ballon D'Or, helped Argentina lift the World Cup trophy by beating France on penalties in the final on Sunday.

PSG President Nasser Al-Khelaifi said this month that Messi was happy at the club, adding that discussions about a contract extension would be held after the World Cup.

Messi, who has 12 goals and 14 assists for PSG in all competitions this season, moved to the French capital from Barcelona in 2021 on a two-year contract.

Sofyan Amrabat - Tottenham, Chelsea, Liverpool, West Ham, Newcastle and Atletico Madrid are among those eyeing developments on the future of Amrabat (Daily Mail, December 16).

Jobe Bellingham - Newcastle are interested in Jude Bellingham's younger brother Jobe and could make a move for the 17-year-old Birmingham midfielder (TeamTalk, December 15).

Mykhaylo Mudryk - Arsenal are in a bidding war with Newcastle and a number of other Premier League clubs over top target Mudryk (The Sun, December 15).


Milan Skriniar - Tottenham and Newcastle have been linked with a move for the Slovakian international whose contract with Inter expires at the end of the season (Metro, December 19).

Youssoufa Moukoko - Newcastle United are said to be just one of the clubs interested in landing 18-year-old Borussia Dortmund forward Youssoufa Moukoko, who is out of contract in the summer and free to discuss his future with any suitors next month (Chronicle, December 19).


Newcastle transfer news and rumours: January transfer window 2023
Sky Sports

Copy link
12h ago
14:18
Who have Man City been linked with?
Jude Bellingham & Bukayo Saka - Manchester City are plotting a double swoop for England stars Saka and Bellingham (Daily Express, December 15; Manchester World, December 19).


Josko Gvardiol - The 20-year-old has become one of the most sought-after defenders in the world following his run to the World Cup semi-finals with Croatia, and City hope to beat Manchester United and Chelsea to the "next Vincent Kompany" (Manchester Evening News, December 17).

Christian McFarlane - Manchester City are ready to sign New York City's 15-year-old left-back Christian McFarlane from their partner club (The Sun, December 4).


Man City transfer news and rumours: January transfer window 2023
Sky Sports

Copy link
12h ago
13:59
Vivell's key signings and sales
After Chelsea confirmed Christopher Vivell as their new technical director, here's a look at some of his key signings and sales when working for Red Bull Salzburg and RB Leipzig. Some big names here!

Red Bull Salzburg

Notable signings: Patson Daka, Amadou Haidara, Dominik Szoboszlai, Karim Adeyemi, Erling Haaland and Benjamin Sesko.

Notable sales: Dayot Upamecano, Amadou Haidara and Naby Keita (all to RB Leipzig), Erling Haaland (Borussia Dortmund).

RB Leipzig

Notable signings: Dominik Szoboszlai, Alexander Sorloth, Brian Brobbey, Andre Silva, Josko Gvardiol, Angelino, Ilaix Moriba, Mohamed Simakan, Timo Werner and Benjamin Sesko (for 2023/24).

Notable sales: Dayot Upamecano (Bayern Munich), Ibrahima Konate (Liverpool), Tyler Adams (Leeds), Ademola Lookman (loaned out twice before permanent move to Atalanta), Brian Brobbey (Ajax).
