Homepage
Accessibility links
Skip to content
Accessibility Help
Sign in
Home
News
Sport
Reel
More menu
Search BBC
BBCSPORT
Home
Football
Cricket
Formula 1
Rugby U
Tennis
Golf
Athletics
Cycling
Winter Sports
World Cup
 All Sport
Manchester City 
Scores & Fixtures
Table
Top Scorers
Pep Guardiola: Manchester City boss needs Champions League win to complete time at club
By Simon Stone
BBC Sport
Last updated on21 December 202221 December 2022.
From the sectionMan City
Pep Guardiola walks past the Champions League trophy
Manchester City made the Champions League final under Pep Guardiola in 2021 but they were beaten by Premier League rivals Chelsea
Manchester City manager Pep Guardiola says his time at the club will 'not be complete' if they fail to win the Champions League.

Guardiola extended his contract with City to 2025 while the Premier League season was breaking for the World Cup.

City have won nine major trophies since he became coach in 2016 but they are yet to win any European silverware.

They came closest to winning the Champions League in 2021, but were beaten by Chelsea in the final.

Aside from the final defeat in Portugal, they were beaten by Real Madrid in last season's semi-final, have exited at the quarter-final stage three times and started Guardiola's tenure with a last-16 defeat by Monaco.

"It's not the only one but I admit it's the trophy we want and my period here will not be complete if we don't win it," said Guardiola.

"I will do everything in the time we have together but I'd say the same before. It's the trophy we don't have and we'll try to do it. I have the feeling they'll get it sooner or later."

City have been drawn against German side RB Leipzig in the last-16 of this season's competition.

This season, City are aiming to become only the fifth club to win the English title in three successive seasons and on Thursday they host Liverpool in the fourth round of the EFL Cup.

Guardiola has won that trophy on four occasions, putting him level with Brian Clough, Sir Alex Ferguson and Jose Mourinho as the most successful manager in the competition's history.

However, City are hampered because they had 16 players at the World Cup.

Nathan Ake, Manuel Akanji and Spain duo Rodri and Aymeric Laporte returned to training at the start of this week and will join Kevin de Bruyne, Ilkay Gundogan, Erling Haaland and Riyad Mahrez as senior players available to face the Reds.

"Step by step they come back," said Guardiola. "We are happy they are back.

"I have the feeling those who were at the World Cup are in better condition than players who weren't because the players who didn't go lack the rhythm."

Guardiola praised 22-year-old striker Julian Alvarez, who was one of Argentina's standout stars during the country's World Cup triumph in Qatar this month.

He also commended Lionel Messi, with whom he enjoyed great success at Barcelona, and former City defender Nicolas Otamendi.

"We're delighted for Julian, he played a lot, his contribution was amazing for the team," said the City boss.

"We have a world champion in our team. We are incredibly happy for him. Congratulations to him and Otamendi, and personally to Messi. To Argentina, well deserved."

'Support your team'
Manchester City and Liverpool's respective chief executives Ferran Soriano and Billy Hogan have written to both sets of supporters before the tie calling for calm after a series of clashes around matches between the clubs in recent seasons.

At Anfield in October, City had the windscreen on their team coach smashed, while their fans sang about the tragedies that have affected Liverpool so badly.

And Guardiola reiterated that message, saying he wants supporters to focus on the game.

"Be supporters and support your team unconditionally," he said. "With the quality players on both sides, enjoy the game."

Top Stories
Beth Mead with the Sports Personality of the Year trophy
Mead wins Sports Personality of the Year
3habout 3 hours agoFrom the sectionSports Personality1949Comments
Spoty Team of the Year winners - the Lionesses
Lionesses & Wiegman honoured at Sports Personality
3habout 3 hours agoFrom the sectionSports Personality
Rob Burrow: Helen Rollason Award winner 2022
'This is for MND warriors' - Burrow & Sinfield honoured
4habout 4 hours agoFrom the sectionSports Personality
Elsewhere on the BBC
Tony Adams
'Alcohol gave me a good hiding'
Tony Adams, former Arsenal and England footballer, opens up about his addiction and recovery

Road rage
Why is road rage between cars and bikes on the rise?
Panorama hits the road to find out what is going on between drivers and cyclists

Films on iPlayer
Have a thrilling movie night tonight!
Check out the star-studded selection of films to watch on BBC iPlayer now

Also in Sport
(Clockwise from top left) Jessica Gadirova, Beth Mead, Eve Muirhead, Jake Wightman, Ben Stokes and Ronnie O'Sullivan
Sports Personality of the Year nominees
Argentina fans celebrate
Fiesta or fiasco? Inside Argentina's victory parade
Ben Stokes and Joe Root
England restore joy to all aspects of Test cricket
A general view of the Azteca Stadium
What to expect from next World Cup in 2026
Steve Borthwick
Borthwick begins England's 'new age'
Greg Norman and Phil Mickelson
'The LIV Golf story: Billions, birdies and bust-ups'
Scotland's Finn Russell with the Calcutta Cup during a Guinness Six Nations match between Scotland and England
Money talks, but is Bath right move for Russell?
England lift the Euro 2022 trophy and Sarina Wiegman celebrates with fans
Can Lionesses top incredible 2022 achievements?
Lionel Messi
Five statistical trends from the 2022 World Cup
Sarina Wiegman
'The world around me has changed' - Wiegman on Euros win
4 December: Kylian Mbappe of France battles for possession with Matty Cash of Poland during the last-16 match between France and Poland at Al Thumama Stadium (photo by Laurence Griffiths)
22 great images from Qatar - and the stories behind them
Lionel Messi
Argentina land in Buenos Aires after World Cup win
Watch the Argentina team, led by captain Lionel Messi, arrive in Buenos Aires after winning the 2022 World Cup in Qatar.

Kylian Mbappe, Julian Alvarez & Youssef En-Nesyri.
Watch the 10 defining goals from 2022 World Cup
BBC Sport relives the 10 goals that tell the story of the 2022 World Cup in Qatar, featuring Kylian Mbappe, Julian Alvarez & Youssef En-Nesyri.

Lionel Messi and the World Cup trophy
See the World Cup final from a different angle
Take a look at how the most dramatic World Cup final played out, with alternative angles, behind the scenes content and unseen shots.

Lionel Messi kisses World Cup trophy
'Now hard to argue against Messi being football's greatest'
A split image of Liverpool's Mohamed Salah being challenged by Manchester City's Joao Cancelo and a screengrab of City's notifications page in the BBC Sport app
How to follow your Premier League team on the BBC
Everything you need to know to make sure you never miss a moment.

Gossip
Today's football gossip
The latest rumours and stories from around the world of football.

Phil McNulty
Phil McNulty
Analysis and opinion from our chief football writer.

Women playing football
How to get into football
How to get into football - the most popular sport in the world, with clubs and facilities throughout the UK.

Explore the BBC
Home
News
Sport
Reel
Worklife
Travel
Future
Culture
TV
Weather
Sounds
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
BBC emails for you
Advertise with us
AdChoices / Do Not Sell My Info
Copyright © 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.